README.md, before:

# Harness

`harness` is a Rust CLI that analyzes and hardens AI-agent harnesses in a repository.  
It focuses on:
- toolset minimization and policy enforcement,
- continuity for long-running agent tasks,
- deterministic quality and verification signals,
- safe, reviewable change planning and apply flows.

## Status

`harness` is in active development. Core commands are implemented and covered with unit tests, integration tests, and CLI ATDD scenarios.

## Requirements

- Rust stable toolchain (Cargo + rustc)
- Git
- POSIX shell (`bash`) for `scripts/install.sh`

## Installation

Recommended:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:mudrii/harness.git
cd harness
./scripts/install.sh --method path --force
```

Alternative (direct git install through Cargo):

```bash
./scripts/install.sh --method git --repo-url https://github.com/mudrii/harness --force
```

Manual install without script:

```bash
cargo install --path . --locked --force
```

Detailed installation guide and troubleshooting: `docs/INSTALLATION.md`.

## Quick start

```bash
harness analyze /path/to/repo --format markdown
harness suggest /path/to/repo --format json
harness apply /path/to/repo --plan-file .harness/plans/latest.json --preview
harness lint /path/to/repo
```

## Command overview

- `harness init`: bootstrap harness scaffold files
- `harness analyze`: produce diagnostics and category scoring
- `harness suggest`: produce ranked recommendations
- `harness apply`: preview/apply generated plans with rollback manifests
- `harness optimize`: optimize recommendations based on traces
- `harness bench`: run benchmark/compare workflows with guardrails
- `harness lint`: enforce harness profile and policy conformance

## Documentation

- Architecture: `ARCHITECTURE.md`
- Code structure map: `docs/CODE_STRUCTURE.md`
- Installation and upgrade: `docs/INSTALLATION.md`
- Product and implementation plan: `PLAN.md`

## Development

```bash
cargo check --all-targets
cargo test
cargo clippy --all-targets
```

## License

MIT. See `Cargo.toml` for package metadata.

Commit message:

Add agent first-read guide and require AGENT_README.md in README

README.md, after:

# Harness

`harness` is a Rust CLI that analyzes and hardens AI-agent harnesses in a repository.  
It focuses on:
- toolset minimization and policy enforcement,
- continuity for long-running agent tasks,
- deterministic quality and verification signals,
- safe, reviewable change planning and apply flows.

## Status

`harness` is in active development. Core commands are implemented and covered with unit tests, integration tests, and CLI ATDD scenarios.

## Requirements

- Rust stable toolchain (Cargo + rustc)
- Git
- POSIX shell (`bash`) for `scripts/install.sh`

## Installation

Recommended:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:mudrii/harness.git
cd harness
./scripts/install.sh --method path --force
```

Alternative (direct git install through Cargo):

```bash
./scripts/install.sh --method git --repo-url https://github.com/mudrii/harness --force
```

Manual install without script:

```bash
cargo install --path . --locked --force
```

Detailed installation guide and troubleshooting: `docs/INSTALLATION.md`.

## Quick start

```bash
harness analyze /path/to/repo --format markdown
harness suggest /path/to/repo --format json
harness apply /path/to/repo --plan-file .harness/plans/latest.json --preview
harness lint /path/to/repo
```

## Command overview

- `harness init`: bootstrap harness scaffold files
- `harness analyze`: produce diagnostics and category scoring
- `harness suggest`: produce ranked recommendations
- `harness apply`: preview/apply generated plans with rollback manifests
- `harness optimize`: optimize recommendations based on traces
- `harness bench`: run benchmark/compare workflows with guardrails
- `harness lint`: enforce harness profile and policy conformance

## Documentation

- Agent first-read guide: `AGENT_README.md`
- Architecture: `ARCHITECTURE.md`
- Code structure map: `docs/CODE_STRUCTURE.md`
- Installation and upgrade: `docs/INSTALLATION.md`
- Product and implementation plan: `PLAN.md`

> For any agent-driven development in this repository, start with `AGENT_README.md` before making changes.

## Development

```bash
cargo check --all-targets
cargo test
cargo clippy --all-targets
```

## License

MIT. See `Cargo.toml` for package metadata.
